docker ps shows all container and docker img shows all images in system
#docker run -it ubuntu    -- this command ran on machine allows us to run ubuntu container on our machine in interactive mode and we can go inside root of that container , ubuntu conatiner downloaded on my macos will be independent of mac no matter what
#any command we run if we have that image in our local system fine otherwise it pulls or downaloads it from docker hub .com   especially in this command docker pull image_name 
3. docker pull image_name   only pullls image but doesnt run it 
4. docker run xyz-  will create  the container from new image and run and show all logs without interaction

5. but docker start and docker stop are used to restart and stop existing container 
6. docker run -d -e MY_XYZ_ROOT=secret --name simrat_container mysql:8.0
#the above command means run docker container -d = Detached mode (runs in background, by default everything runs in attach)  -e MY_XYZ_ROOT=secret = Sets an environment variable  simrat_Conatiner is name of container to be set and mysql image to be used of 8.0 vrsion.

7. to remove an image first we have to remove container then we remove the image from device. 
8. image bhot saari layers se bani hoti h , starts with base layeer , then some layers , then container layer , all these layers except container layer are only for read only

9. docker run -p8080:3306 img_name , it meanss we connect host machine port 8080 to docker container own port 3306 , all request on 8080 will be forwarded to 3306

10. to interact with container termianl - docker exec -it CONT_ID /bin/bash(or sh)jo bhi uss container m  

11. docker container vs VM -   usually a system has three layers , hardware , OS Kernel , application layer ...   so docker virtualizes only applicaion layer , but vM virtualizes application and OS too .
Docker also has small vm isnide it which converts mac or windows to linux as docker container are only fro linux.

12. we know on a machine using docker we can have two diff containers , but if we use docker network that helps our containers to interact with each other without a port or a local host
   1. docker network create xyz(name) - to create one on machine
   2. installed mongo image using command and linked it with this network- docker run -d -p27017:27017 --name mongo --network xyz -e username=abc pass= 123 mongo   
   3. now third step i installed mongo-express (ui to interact with mongodb) image and linked it with same network again.
   4. now our network is setup if from our server a request goes onto that url of mongo db it can be used with same mongo 

13. Docker Compose: uusing this we run .yaml files of docker commands , this makes it easier to run commands rather than typing each of those in terminal.  Visit /mongodb.yaml to see it is working .   in terminal run it by command : docker compose -f mongodb.yaml up -d  (this runs the file and makes containers from fresh)   and command : docker compose -f mongodb.yaml down (delete and stop all containers.)

14. Dockerizing app - app can be made into docker image , and then we share it , then make a container out of it , this is entity which is directly deployed. in ci/cd pipelines jenkins  converts our app into docker image . Visit file Dockerfile to see how we dockerize our app .. ANd then we might have multiple images for our app , to run those all together then we use docker compose.

15. now u create a repo in dockerhub.com , and upload ur image over there through terminal , and a using that pull command , anyone can pull that image and work on it.

16. A Docker volume is a persistent data storage mechanism that exists outside of a container's filesystem. It's the preferred way to persist data generated by and used by Docker containers. When container starts to store some data it also matches and allows that extra space to save data too , when container gets stopped that extra space still has that data , and when that container restarts or regenerates it gets data from that extra space on host machine.
  -v /users/abc/desk/data : /testapp/data     - adding this to our command it attaches or maps a volume.